Title: One Language
Date: 2019-07-14 15:01
Category: Thoughts

Consider a possible world where everyone speaks the same language. What sorts of benefits would society derive from a means of freely communicating with anyone anywhere?

Probably the best candidate right now for the universal language is Esperanto. Esperanto is a constructed language which was developed by a Russian guy with the purpose of being an easy language to learn and develop, and promoting a common form of communication across the world.

Now imagine a day in the year 2100, when Esperanto has been embraced by humanity as the universal language. The internet is similar to what it was before Esperanto, but most sites are written in Esperanto and browsers provide translations for the legacy language sites. It's likely people will always be writing content in other languages though, because language itself is a form of expression, of individuality.

Ultimately this veering off from the standard translates to other realms as well, such as poetry or just literature as a whole. There are cultural underpinnings to many facets of languages, and literature often provides a medium for the expression of those cultural elements. This need for expression could lead to a few scenarios in our imagined future; I'll consider a couple of them to accompany the thought experiment.

One scenario is that the expression of ideas in other languages is banned, for reasons of promoting adoption of Esperanto and punishing creation of content that can only be understood by a limited audience. Perhaps the use of Esperanto is enforced by a world government or agency. This would be a bad outcome, I believe, for the state of the world, unless you find some dark humor relating the situation to Fareinheit 451, translated into Esperanto of course (or maybe the book would be condemned in this future, which means we'd have on our hands a book-burning book book burning).

Another scenario is that people are generally free to publish content in other languages. Society would likely only approve of the use of other languages for artistic expression, though, since it would slight the efforts of creating a universal language. To me this is an interesting result where other languages lose practicality in favor of artistry. Esperanto, by contrast, is designed to be a language optimizing practicality, trading off artsiness. A primary goal of the universal language is to minimize ambiguity, which entails that language constructs like idioms are not supported; essentially, the constructs that generally make languages expressive, what makes them useful to word artists, are absent. (At least you can still be clever organizing the content, like using an increasing size for the paragraphs on a page, idk.)

So, on the one hand (yeah, I know...), a universal language offers easier/better communication with anyone on the world. But on the other hand, there is always a dystopian way things could end up, where the language is misused or results in decreased sense of individuality and increased cultural uniformity. If we're moving towards a collective consiousness, then maybe individuality doesn't really matter anyway. But, in the world of today, the best means we have as humans to separate ourselves from our robot/AI companions is expression of creativity. What would happen to the essence of humanity if we all were speaking a code that is designed solely for transmission of thoughts, disregarding our desire for creativity? Would it be simpler if we just were robots by the point when a universal language is possible? Personally, I think Esperanto is still a really cool concept, and I will be continuing my Duolingo practice. Maybe some day I'll even use the language to converse with someone with whom I wouldn't have been able to conversate before. Maybe the robot transformation has already begun.
